README.md, before:

About
-----

Demonstration code for paper submission to the Bio-ontologies SIG Phenotype Day at ISMB 2014:

> Presence-absence reasoning for evolutionary phenotypes  
> James P. Balhoff, T. Alexander Dececchi, Paula M. Mabee, and Hilmar Lapp

The paper explains the reasoning process used to infer presence and absence of anatomical structures within the Phenoscape Knowledgebase. The process involves generation and addition of supplemental axioms, as well as reasoning workarounds for classifying absences using the ELK reasoner. 
* These features are implmemented in Phenoscape kb-owl-tools project: https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-owl-tools

As an application example the paper describes automated generation of a character matrix of presence/absence information from an example KB composed of data from a single study.
* The matrix generation process is implemented in the Phenoscape presence-absence-matrix project: https://github.com/phenoscape/presence-absence-matrix
* The example dataset was taken from the collection of Phenoscape-annotated morphological matrices: https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-data

The code in this project implements a simple workflow which builds the Knowledgebase, performs the presence-absence matrix query, and prints some summary information.

Running
-------

You can run the example by downloading and executing the script `run.sh`. This requires a Unix environment (e.g. Mac OS X or Linux) with Java 7 and a large amount of memory (we tested successfully with 30 GB).

This script downloads a pre-packaged Java jar which includes all dependencies.

Building from source
--------------------

Compiling the example source requires a Maven installation. Check out the source code using Git: 
```
$ git clone https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoday-reasoning-paper.git
```

From within the source directory, run `mvn package`. This will output two jar files within the `target` folder: one containing code for this project, the other ("one-jar") containing this code as well as all dependencies.

Commit message:

Adds pointer to other data files that can be used.

README.md, after:

About
-----

Demonstration code for paper submission to the Bio-ontologies SIG Phenotype Day at ISMB 2014:

> Presence-absence reasoning for evolutionary phenotypes  
> James P. Balhoff, T. Alexander Dececchi, Paula M. Mabee, and Hilmar Lapp

The paper explains the reasoning process used to infer presence and absence of anatomical structures within the Phenoscape Knowledgebase. The process involves generation and addition of supplemental axioms, as well as reasoning workarounds for classifying absences using the ELK reasoner. 
* These features are implmemented in Phenoscape kb-owl-tools project: https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-owl-tools

As an application example the paper describes automated generation of a character matrix of presence/absence information from an example KB composed of data from a single study.
* The matrix generation process is implemented in the Phenoscape presence-absence-matrix project: https://github.com/phenoscape/presence-absence-matrix
* The example dataset was taken from the collection of Phenoscape-annotated morphological matrices: https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-data

The code in this project implements a simple workflow which builds the Knowledgebase, performs the presence-absence matrix query, and prints some summary information.

Running
-------

You can run the example by downloading and executing the script `run.sh`. This requires a Unix environment (e.g. Mac OS X or Linux) with Java 7 and a large amount of memory (we tested successfully with 30 GB).

This script downloads a pre-packaged Java jar which includes all dependencies.

You can edit the `run.sh` script to use a different data file than the default one (which is the one for which we report results in the paper). The [Phenoscape data repository](https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoscape-data) on Github contains many more NeXML files (`.xml`) with EQ phenotype annotations for published matrices.

Building from source
--------------------

Compiling the example source requires a Maven installation. Check out the source code using Git: 
```
$ git clone https://github.com/phenoscape/phenoday-reasoning-paper.git
```

From within the source directory, run `mvn package`. This will output two jar files within the `target` folder: one containing code for this project, the other ("one-jar") containing this code as well as all dependencies.
